_-environments/readme.md, before:

The importance of environments
==============================

This lab and the coursework use `iverilog`, which is the simulation
tool discussed in the first section [0-tools](../0-tools). However,
in order to develop and test complex digital circuits we need more
than just a verilog compiler, as there are often multiple moving
parts to co-ordinate. So we may need:

- Compilers and assemblers for our target ISA (in this case MIPS)
- Multiple input and output test-cases (small MIPS programs)
- Custom programs in C++ to generate test-cases or generate reference outputs
- Utilities to check whether the output of a processor matches the expected output

You need to make sure that when you modify your solution that it still
behaves in the same way when your team-mates run it on their computer.
As a team you also want to make sure that your team's overall solution
works in the assessment environment.

In 1st year programming people used a combination of `repl.it` and
their own local environment. So some people used native OSX, some people
used MinGW, others used WSL, others used a VM, some may have used
Visual Studio, and so on. From a C++ point of view these are all
equivalent, as C++ is effectively its own platform when you combine
it with the C++ standard libraries: in principle, the same C++
code should compile and work the same everywhere, whether it is
Windows or Linux or OSX or Android. However, in practise there are
often incompatibilities that arise (you may have already found some),
and these become substantial one you are trying to co-ordinate
multiple programs that need to be compiled and interact with the
file-system.

To resolve this problem, the standard platform assumed here is
Ubuntu (specifically 20.04), as this is one of the easiest environments
to run within all the other platforms. It is easy to get running
in OSX and Windows, or other Unix-like operating systems through
a Virtual Machine.

The environment is all about testing and deployment
---------------------------------------------------

Just because the target system is Ubuntu, that doesn't mean you
have to install it as your main operating system. If you like
OSX or Windows, then stick with it - personally I run Windows 10
despite doing almost all research programming in Ubuntu via WSL.

You don't even need to do all of your learning and development in
Ubuntu. It is possible to set up iverilog and the other tools in
OSX and MinGW, and to do lot's of productive work there. However,
any deployed code (i.e. things you will submit for assessment)
should be tested in Ubuntu by at least one team-member, as that
is what the assessment environment will be. 


How to get hold of Ubuntu
=========================

Most people will want to work on their local laptops, so it
is useful to have a local version of Ubuntu (or a very Ubuntu-like
environment), regardless of your laptop's operating system. Following
are some suggested approaches for this, though ultimately it
is your own decision - you should go for the setup that seems
most productive for you.

Windows
-------

### WSL (Recommended)

The recommended route in Windows 10 is to use [WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about).
This is a Microsoft-supported method for installing Ubuntu (and other Linux distributions) in Windows
10, and is resource efficient and reliable.

If you are used to use Visual Studio Code, you may also find the [VSCode Remote Development Extensions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl) useful,
though they are not required.

### Ubuntu in a Virtual Machine

You may prefer to install a full virtual machine. This can be fun, is a good learning
experience, and makes it easier to run some graphical user-interfaces. Generally it
is also reliable, but you may encounter more issues and errors when getting started
with this method.

If you take this approach, then you need to install a [Hypervisor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypervisor), which is
a piece of software that lets you install a guest Operating System (e.g. Ubuntu) within an existing host Operating System (e.g.
whatever your laptop is running)). I would recommend using [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) as the easiest to use
Hypervisor. There is another Hypervisor called Hyper-V that is installed as part of Windows, but it is more difficult to
configure and work with (Hyper-V is actually what WSL runs on, but WSL adds lots of features to make it simpler).

### MinGW or Cygwin (Not recommended)

While you _can_ make MinGW very Ubuntu like, it can be more difficult to maintain compatibility
with the Ubuntu environment. Things like working with the files in the file-system are not
always consistent, and installing and compiling libraries and programs can be more complex.
That said, if you really love either environment, then as long as you can get iverilog
installed then it can be used for development. You just should make sure that someone
else on the team is verifying it against Ubuntu occasionally.

OSX
---

OSX is much more Linux-like than Windows, which makes it a lot closer to Ubuntu (which is
also a Linux). So it already includes a terminal and many of the same tools as Ubuntu
for development (e.g. `g++` and `bash`). However, it also has a number of incompatibilities
with Linux, as Apple tends to customise the commands, tools and paths, and many of the libraries
are out of date. There is also no trivial route to start a Virtual Machine, as seen with WSL in Windows.

So there are two routes you can take, either or both of which you might find useful.

### Installing tools via Homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is a package manager for OSX which makes it easy to install
libraries and tools from the command-line. It is widely used by developers who prefer
OSX, as it allows them to more closely replicate the server environments in which 
most back-end and computational code is deployed. Note that it does _not_ install
Ubuntu, it will simply install a lot of programs which mirror standard Linux tools
more closely.

For the purposes of development you may want to skip the compilation of `iverilog`
and simply install it directly via brew, as they have quite a recent version of
`iverilog`. For this the process is:

1.  Install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)
2.  Install the `iverilog` package:
    ```
    $ brew install iverilog
    ```

From this point on you may want to install other tools, and you can install them
using the `brew` command. If you see us talking about `apt install`
in the context of Ubuntu, the brew equivalent is _usually_ `brew install`.

### Installing Ubuntu in a Virtual Machine

The [VirtualBox]([VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/)) hypervisor works in OSX
as well as Windows, and is a good method for running virtual machines in OSX.

We have previously done a [walk-through of installing a Virtual Machine in OSX](https://imperial.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=f057b4c2-d845-4bf8-a0ce-aadf00e7f0a5),
which shows the steps for installing Ubuntu in OSX. This was for a slightly different version of OSX, but
the overall steps should still be the same.

Commit message:

Minor tweaks to get mu0 test-bench working with OSX+brew.

_-environments/readme.md, after:

The importance of environments
==============================

This lab and the coursework use `iverilog`, which is the simulation
tool discussed in the first section [0-tools](../0-tools). However,
in order to develop and test complex digital circuits we need more
than just a verilog compiler, as there are often multiple moving
parts to co-ordinate. So we may need:

- Compilers and assemblers for our target ISA (in this case MIPS)
- Multiple input and output test-cases (small MIPS programs)
- Custom programs in C++ to generate test-cases or generate reference outputs
- Utilities to check whether the output of a processor matches the expected output

You need to make sure that when you modify your solution that it still
behaves in the same way when your team-mates run it on their computer.
As a team you also want to make sure that your team's overall solution
works in the assessment environment.

In 1st year programming people used a combination of `repl.it` and
their own local environment. So some people used native OSX, some people
used MinGW, others used WSL, others used a VM, some may have used
Visual Studio, and so on. From a C++ point of view these are all
equivalent, as C++ is effectively its own platform when you combine
it with the C++ standard libraries: in principle, the same C++
code should compile and work the same everywhere, whether it is
Windows or Linux or OSX or Android. However, in practise there are
often incompatibilities that arise (you may have already found some),
and these become substantial one you are trying to co-ordinate
multiple programs that need to be compiled and interact with the
file-system.

To resolve this problem, the standard platform assumed here is
Ubuntu (specifically 20.04), as this is one of the easiest environments
to run within all the other platforms. It is easy to get running
in OSX and Windows, or other Unix-like operating systems through
a Virtual Machine.

The environment is all about testing and deployment
---------------------------------------------------

Just because the target system is Ubuntu, that doesn't mean you
have to install it as your main operating system. If you like
OSX or Windows, then stick with it - personally I run Windows 10
despite doing almost all research programming in Ubuntu via WSL.

You don't even need to do all of your learning and development in
Ubuntu. It is possible to set up iverilog and the other tools in
OSX and MinGW, and to do lot's of productive work there. However,
any deployed code (i.e. things you will submit for assessment)
should be tested in Ubuntu by at least one team-member, as that
is what the assessment environment will be. 


How to get hold of Ubuntu
=========================

Most people will want to work on their local laptops, so it
is useful to have a local version of Ubuntu (or a very Ubuntu-like
environment), regardless of your laptop's operating system. Following
are some suggested approaches for this, though ultimately it
is your own decision - you should go for the setup that seems
most productive for you.

Windows
-------

### WSL (Recommended)

The recommended route in Windows 10 is to use [WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about).
This is a Microsoft-supported method for installing Ubuntu (and other Linux distributions) in Windows
10, and is resource efficient and reliable.

If you are used to use Visual Studio Code, you may also find the [VSCode Remote Development Extensions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl) useful,
though they are not required.

### Ubuntu in a Virtual Machine

You may prefer to install a full virtual machine. This can be fun, is a good learning
experience, and makes it easier to run some graphical user-interfaces. Generally it
is also reliable, but you may encounter more issues and errors when getting started
with this method.

If you take this approach, then you need to install a [Hypervisor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypervisor), which is
a piece of software that lets you install a guest Operating System (e.g. Ubuntu) within an existing host Operating System (e.g.
whatever your laptop is running)). I would recommend using [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) as the easiest to use
Hypervisor. There is another Hypervisor called Hyper-V that is installed as part of Windows, but it is more difficult to
configure and work with (Hyper-V is actually what WSL runs on, but WSL adds lots of features to make it simpler).

### MinGW or Cygwin (Not recommended)

While you _can_ make MinGW very Ubuntu like, it can be more difficult to maintain compatibility
with the Ubuntu environment. Things like working with the files in the file-system are not
always consistent, and installing and compiling libraries and programs can be more complex.
That said, if you really love either environment, then as long as you can get iverilog
installed then it can be used for development. You just should make sure that someone
else on the team is verifying it against Ubuntu occasionally.

OSX
---

OSX is much more Linux-like than Windows, which makes it a lot closer to Ubuntu (which is
also a Linux). So it already includes a terminal and many of the same tools as Ubuntu
for development (e.g. `g++` and `bash`). However, it also has a number of incompatibilities
with Linux, as Apple tends to customise the commands, tools and paths, and many of the libraries
are out of date. There is also no trivial route to start a Virtual Machine, as seen with WSL in Windows.

So there are two routes you can take, either or both of which you might find useful.

### Installing tools via Homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is a package manager for OSX which makes it easy to install
libraries and tools from the command-line. It is widely used by developers who prefer
OSX, as it allows them to more closely replicate the server environments in which 
most back-end and computational code is deployed. Note that it does _not_ install
Ubuntu, it will simply install a lot of programs which mirror standard Linux tools
more closely.

For the purposes of development you may want to skip the compilation of `iverilog`
and simply install it directly via brew, as they have quite a recent version of
`iverilog`. For this the process is:

1.  Install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)
2.  Install the `icarus-verilog` package:
    ```
    $ brew install icarus-verilog
    ```

From this point on you may want to install other tools, and you can install them
using the `brew` command. If you see us talking about `apt install`
in the context of Ubuntu, the brew equivalent is _usually_ `brew install`.

For examples of the kinds of incompatibilities that are found:

- The scripts in [build_utils.sh](../4-verilog-mu0/build_utils.sh) compiles some programs using
  `g++`, and assumes that the compiler will select at least the [C++11](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11)
  revision of the language from 2011. However, Apple use the `clang` compiler (a fine compiler), which pretends
  to be `g++`, and does not choose c++11 by default. So to get it to run in OSX it was necessary to
  add the `-std=c++11` flag to the compilation statement.

- The version of Icarus verilog that comes with brew by default is version 11 (at the time of writing),
  which is one release behind the main version of Icarus. As a consequence it is more restricted in the
  order of parameters, and _requires_ that all source files appear after parameters. Later versions 
  allow them to be mixed (in the same that `g++` does).
  

### Installing Ubuntu in a Virtual Machine

The [VirtualBox]([VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/)) hypervisor works in OSX
as well as Windows, and is a good method for running virtual machines in OSX.

We have previously done a [walk-through of installing a Virtual Machine in OSX](https://imperial.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=f057b4c2-d845-4bf8-a0ce-aadf00e7f0a5),
which shows the steps for installing Ubuntu in OSX. This was for a slightly different version of OSX, but
the overall steps should still be the same.
