0-tools/readme.md, before:



Tools
=====

The purpose of this section is to get some experience of different
tools used when developing, testing, and debugging digital
designs. 

1. Compile and install the Icarus Verilog simulator

2. Compile and run a Verilog simulation

3. View Verilog test-bench output as waveforms

4. Add assertions to a test-bench

5. Add print statements to a test-bench

Note that you are completely free to use ModelSim or other tools during
your development (possibly you used it in 1st year), but in the assessment
environment for the CPU deliverable we will use Icarus Verilog.

Installing a Verilog simulator
-----------------------------

The simulator we will use is called [Icarus Verilog](http://iverilog.icarus.com/). This is
a free and open-source simulator, available under the [LGPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Lesser_General_Public_License) license.
It is purely a command-line simulator, and can be compiled and used under multiple operating systems
including Linux, OSX, and Windows.

While Icarus can be installed via `apt get Verilog` under Ubuntu, this will not get the
latest version, and you may encounter unsupported features or bugs. In particular,
you may find that the Ubuntu versions don't support `always_comb` and `always_ff`. It is recommended
that you [compile and install it from scratch](https://iverilog.fandom.com/wiki/Installation_Guide).
This both ensures that you have the latest version, and also shows you the standard
process for compiling and installing many software packages.

The main installation steps for Ubuntu (e.g. 20.04) are:

1.  Clone the Icarus Verilog git repository and enter the directory:

    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/steveicarus/iverilog.git
    cd iverilog
    ```

2.  Install pre-requisite libraries and packages:
    
    ```sh
    sudo apt install gperf autoconf bison gcc make
    ```

    This should be enough for Ubuntu 20.04, and probably other recent Ubuntus and other distros.,
    though there may be some missing libraries that get reported in the next steps.

3.  Use [GNU autotools](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Autotools) to generate a configuration script:

    ```bash
    sh autoconf.sh
    ```

    The output will be a script called `configure`, which is used to adapt the compilation process according
    to the current operating-system and development tools. This step is part of what allows this software
    (and much other open-source software) to compile on a very wide range of unix-like platforms.

4.  Run the configuration script:
    
    ```
    ./configure
    ```

    This script will perform a number of checks on your environment, such as determining what
    kind of operating system it is, whether it is 64-bit or 32-bit, what libraries are installed,
    where header files are located, and many other things. The output of this will be a number
    of files describing exactly how the software should be built (compiled and linked) for your specific system.

5.  Build the software using the tool [`make`](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/):

    ```
    make
    ```

    Makefiles are a common way of managing the compilation of software, particularly when 
    multiple source files are being compiled, and when other tools need to be run as
    part of the build process. Describing the build steps as a makefile provides a
    number of advantages, such as minimal rebuilds that only recompile files that have
    changed, and parallel compilation across all your CPU cores. The ability to use
    other tools as part of the build process is also important for complex software,
    as it may be necessary to generate source files or analyse input files. During
    all the compilation messages that flash pass you might notice the build process
    call the `bison` parser generator, which is a tool that you will most likely
    want to use next term when writing your compiler.

    Once this process has completed, you'll see large numbers of `.o` files which
    have been compiled, and also a number of binaries have been built, such as
    `driver/iverilog`. However, the `iverilog` binary is not yet installed and
    in the [search path](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PATH_(variable)), so if
    you try to run `iverilog` from any other directories it won`t work.

6.  Install the compiler:

    ```
    sudo make install
    ```

    This will install the binaries, support files, and other parts of the packages
    into standard system directories. For example, it will install the `iverilog`
    binary into `/usr/local/bin/`, and install the man pages (i.e. documentation)
    into `/usr/local/man`. At this point you should be able to run the program
    using the command `iverilog`, and get documentation on it using `man iverilog`.

This process involves a number of steps, and some stages such as compilation
take a bit of time. If instead you were to perform `apt get Verilog` it would
download pre-compiled binaries and data files, then install them directly.
The pre-compiled binary packages are much more convenient to use, particularly
because distribution maintainers like Ubuntu take care to make sure that
all their binary packages work together. However, you will often find the 
need to compile packages from source, for a number of reasons:

1. The packaged binary may be too old, and lack recent bug-fixes or features.

2. The packaged binary may be too _new_, and no longer support data files you
    already have or the features you need to use.

3. You may need to specify specific configuration flags, in order to disable
    or enable specific features at compile-time.

4. Often there is just no binary package available for a piece of software.


Compile and run a Verilog simulation
------------------------------------

Just like software needs to be compiled before it can be executed,
hardware simulations also need to be translated into a low-level
form before they can be executed. The exact form of the simulation "binary"
depends very much on the simulation tool, with each simulator having
its own compiled representation. However, there are a number of
common steps when simulating Verilog, VHDL, or any other hardware
description language.

The files `and_gate.v`, `not_gate.v`, and `and_not_testbench.v` each describe Verilog modules, and
we wish to simulate them as a single system. 

-> Open the files in a text editor and look at the modules.

You should be able to see that one module _instantiates_ the other
two modules, i.e. it creates and contains instances of the modules.
This defines the hierarchy of the system, which is a tree of
module instantiations with parent-child relationships. The outer-most
module at the root of the tree is not instantiated by any other
module, and is called the _top-level module_ (sometimes called "root module"). During simulation there
must be a single top-level module representing the outer-most level of
the design.

The top-level module is conceptually similar to the idea of `main` as the
outer-most function in the tree of software calls in C++. But the
analogy is not perfect:

-   The module hierarchy is static, and cannot be changed at run-time.
    Once the module is synthesised to hardware, the hierarchy represents
    the fixed set of hardware resources dedicated to the design.

-   The tree of function-calls made from `main` in software is dynamic,
    and may change every time the program runs according to the input data.

In some cases the simulation tool will infer the top-level module,
but sometimes it may be necessary to explicitly identify the top-level
module using simulator specific flags.

The main steps needed in an RTL simulation flow are:

1.  **Compilation** : the input Verilog source files are passed, and the
    basic syntax is checked. In some tools multiple Verilog files are
    compiled independently, just like you might compile multiple C++
    files into object files. In other tools compilation is combined
    with the elaboration stage.

2.  **Elaboration**: the complete module hierarchy is built, with Verilog
    modules instantiated, and the links between them resolved. This
    is a bit like linked multiple object files into a binary, but
    there are a larger class of errors that can occur at this stage
    in hardware design.

3.  **Simulation**: the compiled design is simulated over some requested time-period,
    modelling the changes in internal logic levels using events. During
    simulation the simulated design may interact with the external environment,
    for example printing messages to the console, or reading from files. It is
    also common to dump traces for certain signals, so that they can be
    viewed as wave-forms.

Icarus Verilog does not support separate compilation so there are two
main phases:

1.  **Compilation** + **elaboration**:

    The following is all one command, with the slash (`\`) used to indicate
    command continuation:
    ```bash
    $ iverilog -Wall -g 2012 -s and_not_testbench -o and_not_testbench \
         and_gate.v not_gate.v and_not_testbench.v
    ```

    This command compiles the Verilog modules into a simulation
    binary called `and_not_testbench`. The command options are:

    -   `-Wall` : Enable all warnings during compilation.
    -   `-g 2012` : Use the 2012 revision of the Verilog language. This allows for
            additional language constructs compared with "classic" Verilog.
    -   `-s and_not_testbench` : Specify that `and_not_testbench` should be the
            top-level module. In this case it could be inferred, but it does not
            hurt to specify explicitly.

2.  Execution:

    ```bash
    $ ./and_not_testbench
    ```

    This causes the simulation to run. However, very little will actually appear
    to happen, as the simulation will complete without printing anything. We will
    need to either view waveforms, add assertions, or print output in order to
    see anything.

    The compiled file looks like a binary, but if you run:
    ```bash
    $ file and_not_testbench
    ```
    you will see that it is not. If you view `and_not_testbench` in a text editor, you can see the internal
    code for the compiled simulation. The [shebang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix))
    at the start of the file serves the same purpose as the shebang in a shell script,
    and specifies the general simulation program for any compiled Icarus Verilog
    program.

View Verilog test-bench output as waveforms
-------------------------------------------

One way of understanding what is happening in a simulation is to view
how the values of signals change over time. This can help you understand
the relationships between when different signals change. A useful tool
for viewing signals is [GTKWave](http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/), which
is widely used in open-source EDA tool-chains for viewing signals.
GTKWave is available under Linux, OSX, and Windows, and can be compiled
from source (using a similar method to Icarus Verilog). In this case
the pre-packaged binaries should be fine.

By default the simulation does not generate waveforms, so the test-bench
needs to be modified to produce them.

1.  Install GTKWave:
    ```bash
    sudo apt install gtkwave
    ```

2.  Modify the test-bench to enable dumping of signals. At the point
    marked `/* INSERT WAVEFORM COMMANDS */` in `and_not_testbench.v`
    insert the following:
    ```Verilog
    $dumpfile("and_not_testbench_waves.vcd");
    $dumpvars(0,and_not_testbench);
    ```

    The first command specifies the file-name of the waveform to be written,
    while the second specifies which module to dump the signals from and
    the number of levels in the hierarchy to include.

4.  Compile and run the simulation again, to generate the waveform file `and_not_testbench_waves.vcd`.

5.  Open the waveform file `and_not_testbench_waves.vcd` in `gtkwave`:
    ```bash
    gtkwave and_not_testbench_waves.vcd
    ```

    At this point you should see a window pop-up which shows you a number of panels,
    but no waveforms yet. You need to specify which signals to actually
    display, as often there will be thousands of signals from which you need to
    pick a small sub-set.

    **Note**: [WSL on Windows only] if you are using WSL on Windows, be aware that
    (as of Aug 2021) there is no default support for [GUI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface) windows from within WSL
    (unless you are on a windows insiders preview). You have two main choices:

    - Install an [X server](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_Window_System) so that
      WSL can display windows. You will probably learn quite a lot doing this, but
      don't do it under time pressure.

    - Install GTWave in Windows, and use file-sharing between the WSL guest and
      windows host. For example, if you have a file `~/wibble.vcd` in WSL, you
      can open it as `\\wsl$:\home\$USER\wibble.vcd` in a Windows programme
      (this assumes you are using [WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/compare-versions)).

6.  In the top-left panel of GTKWave (marked SST), right-click
    on `and_not_testbench`, and select `Recurse Import` -> `Append`.

    You should now be able to see the individual waveforms for each signal
    in the heirarchy.

You may wish to play around with the interface, as there are many features
making it easier to work with, such as:

-   "Toggle Trace Heir" : Used to prefix the signals with their position in 
    the hierarchy.

-   Left-clicking in the "Waves" pane shows a vertical line, allowing you to
    compare the values of many signals at the same time instant.

-   Right clicking on a signal in the "Signals" pane allows you to change the
    data format for that signal. For example, you could choose to have signals
    shown as decimal, and/or interpreted as twos-complement.

-   Selecting a signal in the "Signals" pane and then pressing the "left" or "right"
    key allows you to move between transitions. For the `clk` signal this
    allows you to visit each cycle. For other signals it allows you to jump
    to key points when they change value.

-   Zoom the time-scale, either using `ctrl`+mouse-wheel, or using the `+` and `-`
    buttons. If you open a simulation and the waveforms either look flat, or just
    are a solid block of transitions, you can zoom in or out till the signal
    transitions are clear.

Add assertions to a test-bench
------------------------------

Staring at waveforms can be useful while debugging a circuit, but is impractical
when there are thousands of cycles of transitions to track. A human is not going
to be able to reliably calculate the expected output signals and compare them,
and even if they could it would take days to check one waveform. We need an
automated way of indicating what the expected behaviour is, and then be
informed if the behaviour is ever violated. In Verilog this is performed using `assert`,
which has a similar intended purpose and behaviour to `assert` in C++. 

The `and_not_testbench` currently contains no assertions, so it has no
idea whether the `and` and `not` gate are correct:

1.  Replace the comment  `/* INSERT assert HERE */` with the
    statement
    ```Verilog
    assert(d==1);
    ```

2.  Recompile and simulate the test-bench. It should still simulate as before.

3.  Deliberately break the `not` gate by replacing `assign r = ~a;` with
    ```Verilog
    assign r = a;
    ```

4.  Recompile and simulate the test-bench. It should now report an assertion
    error, and identify the line where the error occurred.

5.  Restore the `not` gate functionality, and check the test-bench passes again.

6.  Insert appropriate `assert` statements after the remaining three delay statements,
    and check that the test-bench passes.

It might seem odd to deliberately break the circuit, but it is often worth
temporarily violating assertions in order to check that they are active
and have some power.

Add print statements to a test-bench
------------------------------------

Another debugging technique is to use `$display`, which is similar to
`printf` in C, or `cout` in C++. This allows you to print out messages
during simulation, including the values of pre-determined signals.

1.  Replace the comment `/* INSERT display HERE */` with:
    ```Verilog
    $display("a=%d, b=%d, d=%d", a, b, d);
    ```

2.  Compile and simulate the test-bench, and you should see that the values
    of the signals `a`, `b`, and `d` are printed out.

3.  Repeat the process (i.e. insert `$display`) just after the other three delays.

3.  Compile and simulate the test-bench, and check that all the values are
    printed out.

4.  We can place `$display` inside conditional blocks to control how often
    they print. Replace all four existing `$display` statements with:
    ```Verilog
    if ( d != ~(a&b) ) begin
        $display("Error : a=%d, b=%d, d=%d,  expected=%d", a, b, dk, ~(a&b));
    end
    ```
    This should ensure that the printing only happens when `d` has the wrong value.

5.  Compile and simulate the test-bench. Given the `and` and `nno` gates are
    correct, no output should be printed.

6.  Break the `and` gate again, and then re-simulate. You should find that
    the incorrect values get printed out just before the assertions fail.

An advantage of `$display` over looking at waveforms is that you can print
out variables under very specific conditions. So if you have thousands of
signals over thousands of cycles, it can be used to extract the exact
situation where a problem happened. Waveforms are often more useful
when you don't know why things failed, and you are looking for clues.

Commit message:

Added missing flex, and suggested apt get update. Thanks to Yann.

0-tools/readme.md, after:



Tools
=====

The purpose of this section is to get some experience of different
tools used when developing, testing, and debugging digital
designs. 

1. Compile and install the Icarus Verilog simulator

2. Compile and run a Verilog simulation

3. View Verilog test-bench output as waveforms

4. Add assertions to a test-bench

5. Add print statements to a test-bench

Note that you are completely free to use ModelSim or other tools during
your development (possibly you used it in 1st year), but in the assessment
environment for the CPU deliverable we will use Icarus Verilog.

Installing a Verilog simulator
-----------------------------

The simulator we will use is called [Icarus Verilog](http://iverilog.icarus.com/). This is
a free and open-source simulator, available under the [LGPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Lesser_General_Public_License) license.
It is purely a command-line simulator, and can be compiled and used under multiple operating systems
including Linux, OSX, and Windows.

While Icarus can be installed via `apt get Verilog` under Ubuntu, this will not get the
latest version, and you may encounter unsupported features or bugs. In particular,
you may find that the Ubuntu versions don't support `always_comb` and `always_ff`. It is recommended
that you [compile and install it in Ubuntu from scratch](https://iverilog.fandom.com/wiki/Installation_Guide).
This both ensures that you have the latest version, and also shows you the standard
process for compiling and installing many software packages.

The main installation steps for Ubuntu (e.g. 20.04) are:

1.  Clone the Icarus Verilog git repository and enter the directory:

    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/steveicarus/iverilog.git
    cd iverilog
    ```

2.  Update Ubuntu's list of packages:

    ```
    sudo apt update
    ```

    Install pre-requisite libraries and packages:
    
    ```sh
    sudo apt install gperf autoconf bison gcc make flex
    ```

    This should be enough for Ubuntu 20.04, and probably other recent Ubuntus and other distros.,
    though there may be some missing libraries that get reported in the next steps.

3.  Use [GNU autotools](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Autotools) to generate a configuration script:

    ```bash
    sh autoconf.sh
    ```

    The output will be a script called `configure`, which is used to adapt the compilation process according
    to the current operating-system and development tools. This step is part of what allows this software
    (and much other open-source software) to compile on a very wide range of unix-like platforms.

4.  Run the configuration script:
    
    ```
    ./configure
    ```

    This script will perform a number of checks on your environment, such as determining what
    kind of operating system it is, whether it is 64-bit or 32-bit, what libraries are installed,
    where header files are located, and many other things. The output of this will be a number
    of files describing exactly how the software should be built (compiled and linked) for your specific system.

5.  Build the software using the tool [`make`](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/):

    ```
    make
    ```

    Makefiles are a common way of managing the compilation of software, particularly when 
    multiple source files are being compiled, and when other tools need to be run as
    part of the build process. Describing the build steps as a makefile provides a
    number of advantages, such as minimal rebuilds that only recompile files that have
    changed, and parallel compilation across all your CPU cores. The ability to use
    other tools as part of the build process is also important for complex software,
    as it may be necessary to generate source files or analyse input files. During
    all the compilation messages that flash pass you might notice the build process
    call the `bison` parser generator, which is a tool that you will most likely
    want to use next term when writing your compiler.

    Once this process has completed, you'll see large numbers of `.o` files which
    have been compiled, and also a number of binaries have been built, such as
    `driver/iverilog`. However, the `iverilog` binary is not yet installed and
    in the [search path](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PATH_(variable)), so if
    you try to run `iverilog` from any other directories it won`t work.

6.  Install the compiler:

    ```
    sudo make install
    ```

    This will install the binaries, support files, and other parts of the packages
    into standard system directories. For example, it will install the `iverilog`
    binary into `/usr/local/bin/`, and install the man pages (i.e. documentation)
    into `/usr/local/man`. At this point you should be able to run the program
    using the command `iverilog`, and get documentation on it using `man iverilog`.

This process involves a number of steps, and some stages such as compilation
take a bit of time. If instead you were to perform `apt get Verilog` it would
download pre-compiled binaries and data files, then install them directly.
The pre-compiled binary packages are much more convenient to use, particularly
because distribution maintainers like Ubuntu take care to make sure that
all their binary packages work together. However, you will often find the 
need to compile packages from source, for a number of reasons:

1. The packaged binary may be too old, and lack recent bug-fixes or features.

2. The packaged binary may be too _new_, and no longer support data files you
    already have or the features you need to use.

3. You may need to specify specific configuration flags, in order to disable
    or enable specific features at compile-time.

4. Often there is just no binary package available for a piece of software.


Compile and run a Verilog simulation
------------------------------------

Just like software needs to be compiled before it can be executed,
hardware simulations also need to be translated into a low-level
form before they can be executed. The exact form of the simulation "binary"
depends very much on the simulation tool, with each simulator having
its own compiled representation. However, there are a number of
common steps when simulating Verilog, VHDL, or any other hardware
description language.

The files `and_gate.v`, `not_gate.v`, and `and_not_testbench.v` each describe Verilog modules, and
we wish to simulate them as a single system. 

-> Open the files in a text editor and look at the modules.

You should be able to see that one module _instantiates_ the other
two modules, i.e. it creates and contains instances of the modules.
This defines the hierarchy of the system, which is a tree of
module instantiations with parent-child relationships. The outer-most
module at the root of the tree is not instantiated by any other
module, and is called the _top-level module_ (sometimes called "root module"). During simulation there
must be a single top-level module representing the outer-most level of
the design.

The top-level module is conceptually similar to the idea of `main` as the
outer-most function in the tree of software calls in C++. But the
analogy is not perfect:

-   The module hierarchy is static, and cannot be changed at run-time.
    Once the module is synthesised to hardware, the hierarchy represents
    the fixed set of hardware resources dedicated to the design.

-   The tree of function-calls made from `main` in software is dynamic,
    and may change every time the program runs according to the input data.

In some cases the simulation tool will infer the top-level module,
but sometimes it may be necessary to explicitly identify the top-level
module using simulator specific flags.

The main steps needed in an RTL simulation flow are:

1.  **Compilation** : the input Verilog source files are passed, and the
    basic syntax is checked. In some tools multiple Verilog files are
    compiled independently, just like you might compile multiple C++
    files into object files. In other tools compilation is combined
    with the elaboration stage.

2.  **Elaboration**: the complete module hierarchy is built, with Verilog
    modules instantiated, and the links between them resolved. This
    is a bit like linked multiple object files into a binary, but
    there are a larger class of errors that can occur at this stage
    in hardware design.

3.  **Simulation**: the compiled design is simulated over some requested time-period,
    modelling the changes in internal logic levels using events. During
    simulation the simulated design may interact with the external environment,
    for example printing messages to the console, or reading from files. It is
    also common to dump traces for certain signals, so that they can be
    viewed as wave-forms.

Icarus Verilog does not support separate compilation so there are two
main phases:

1.  **Compilation** + **elaboration**:

    The following is all one command, with the slash (`\`) used to indicate
    command continuation:
    ```bash
    $ iverilog -Wall -g 2012 -s and_not_testbench -o and_not_testbench \
         and_gate.v not_gate.v and_not_testbench.v
    ```

    This command compiles the Verilog modules into a simulation
    binary called `and_not_testbench`. The command options are:

    -   `-Wall` : Enable all warnings during compilation.
    -   `-g 2012` : Use the 2012 revision of the Verilog language. This allows for
            additional language constructs compared with "classic" Verilog.
    -   `-s and_not_testbench` : Specify that `and_not_testbench` should be the
            top-level module. In this case it could be inferred, but it does not
            hurt to specify explicitly.

2.  Execution:

    ```bash
    $ ./and_not_testbench
    ```

    This causes the simulation to run. However, very little will actually appear
    to happen, as the simulation will complete without printing anything. We will
    need to either view waveforms, add assertions, or print output in order to
    see anything.

    The compiled file looks like a binary, but if you run:
    ```bash
    $ file and_not_testbench
    ```
    you will see that it is not. If you view `and_not_testbench` in a text editor, you can see the internal
    code for the compiled simulation. The [shebang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix))
    at the start of the file serves the same purpose as the shebang in a shell script,
    and specifies the general simulation program for any compiled Icarus Verilog
    program.

View Verilog test-bench output as waveforms
-------------------------------------------

One way of understanding what is happening in a simulation is to view
how the values of signals change over time. This can help you understand
the relationships between when different signals change. A useful tool
for viewing signals is [GTKWave](http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/), which
is widely used in open-source EDA tool-chains for viewing signals.
GTKWave is available under Linux, OSX, and Windows, and can be compiled
from source (using a similar method to Icarus Verilog). In this case
the pre-packaged binaries should be fine.

By default the simulation does not generate waveforms, so the test-bench
needs to be modified to produce them.

1.  Install GTKWave:
    ```bash
    sudo apt install gtkwave
    ```

2.  Modify the test-bench to enable dumping of signals. At the point
    marked `/* INSERT WAVEFORM COMMANDS */` in `and_not_testbench.v`
    insert the following:
    ```Verilog
    $dumpfile("and_not_testbench_waves.vcd");
    $dumpvars(0,and_not_testbench);
    ```

    The first command specifies the file-name of the waveform to be written,
    while the second specifies which module to dump the signals from and
    the number of levels in the hierarchy to include.

4.  Compile and run the simulation again, to generate the waveform file `and_not_testbench_waves.vcd`.

5.  Open the waveform file `and_not_testbench_waves.vcd` in `gtkwave`:
    ```bash
    gtkwave and_not_testbench_waves.vcd
    ```

    At this point you should see a window pop-up which shows you a number of panels,
    but no waveforms yet. You need to specify which signals to actually
    display, as often there will be thousands of signals from which you need to
    pick a small sub-set.

    **Note**: [WSL on Windows only] if you are using WSL on Windows, be aware that
    (as of Aug 2021) there is no default support for [GUI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface) windows from within WSL
    (unless you are on a windows insiders preview). You have two main choices:

    - Install an [X server](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_Window_System) so that
      WSL can display windows. You will probably learn quite a lot doing this, but
      don't do it under time pressure.

    - Install GTWave in Windows, and use file-sharing between the WSL guest and
      windows host. For example, if you have a file `~/wibble.vcd` in WSL, you
      can open it as `\\wsl$:\home\$USER\wibble.vcd` in a Windows programme
      (this assumes you are using [WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/compare-versions)).

6.  In the top-left panel of GTKWave (marked SST), right-click
    on `and_not_testbench`, and select `Recurse Import` -> `Append`.

    You should now be able to see the individual waveforms for each signal
    in the heirarchy.

You may wish to play around with the interface, as there are many features
making it easier to work with, such as:

-   "Toggle Trace Heir" : Used to prefix the signals with their position in 
    the hierarchy.

-   Left-clicking in the "Waves" pane shows a vertical line, allowing you to
    compare the values of many signals at the same time instant.

-   Right clicking on a signal in the "Signals" pane allows you to change the
    data format for that signal. For example, you could choose to have signals
    shown as decimal, and/or interpreted as twos-complement.

-   Selecting a signal in the "Signals" pane and then pressing the "left" or "right"
    key allows you to move between transitions. For the `clk` signal this
    allows you to visit each cycle. For other signals it allows you to jump
    to key points when they change value.

-   Zoom the time-scale, either using `ctrl`+mouse-wheel, or using the `+` and `-`
    buttons. If you open a simulation and the waveforms either look flat, or just
    are a solid block of transitions, you can zoom in or out till the signal
    transitions are clear.

Add assertions to a test-bench
------------------------------

Staring at waveforms can be useful while debugging a circuit, but is impractical
when there are thousands of cycles of transitions to track. A human is not going
to be able to reliably calculate the expected output signals and compare them,
and even if they could it would take days to check one waveform. We need an
automated way of indicating what the expected behaviour is, and then be
informed if the behaviour is ever violated. In Verilog this is performed using `assert`,
which has a similar intended purpose and behaviour to `assert` in C++. 

The `and_not_testbench` currently contains no assertions, so it has no
idea whether the `and` and `not` gate are correct:

1.  Replace the comment  `/* INSERT assert HERE */` with the
    statement
    ```Verilog
    assert(d==1);
    ```

2.  Recompile and simulate the test-bench. It should still simulate as before.

3.  Deliberately break the `not` gate by replacing `assign r = ~a;` with
    ```Verilog
    assign r = a;
    ```

4.  Recompile and simulate the test-bench. It should now report an assertion
    error, and identify the line where the error occurred.

5.  Restore the `not` gate functionality, and check the test-bench passes again.

6.  Insert appropriate `assert` statements after the remaining three delay statements,
    and check that the test-bench passes.

It might seem odd to deliberately break the circuit, but it is often worth
temporarily violating assertions in order to check that they are active
and have some power.

Add print statements to a test-bench
------------------------------------

Another debugging technique is to use `$display`, which is similar to
`printf` in C, or `cout` in C++. This allows you to print out messages
during simulation, including the values of pre-determined signals.

1.  Replace the comment `/* INSERT display HERE */` with:
    ```Verilog
    $display("a=%d, b=%d, d=%d", a, b, d);
    ```

2.  Compile and simulate the test-bench, and you should see that the values
    of the signals `a`, `b`, and `d` are printed out.

3.  Repeat the process (i.e. insert `$display`) just after the other three delays.

3.  Compile and simulate the test-bench, and check that all the values are
    printed out.

4.  We can place `$display` inside conditional blocks to control how often
    they print. Replace all four existing `$display` statements with:
    ```Verilog
    if ( d != ~(a&b) ) begin
        $display("Error : a=%d, b=%d, d=%d,  expected=%d", a, b, dk, ~(a&b));
    end
    ```
    This should ensure that the printing only happens when `d` has the wrong value.

5.  Compile and simulate the test-bench. Given the `and` and `nno` gates are
    correct, no output should be printed.

6.  Break the `and` gate again, and then re-simulate. You should find that
    the incorrect values get printed out just before the assertions fail.

An advantage of `$display` over looking at waveforms is that you can print
out variables under very specific conditions. So if you have thousands of
signals over thousands of cycles, it can be used to extract the exact
situation where a problem happened. Waveforms are often more useful
when you don't know why things failed, and you are looking for clues.
